Okay, everyone.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
That's ten past.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have a quick shout out from
IMP Sports.
NOTE CONF
Before we start the lecture, I can just see her
excited for this lecture.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
That's what you're feeling at the moment.
NOTE CONF
That's great.
So a lot of people feeling tired and waiting for
NOTE CONF
Friday.
Somebody got flu.
NOTE CONF
That sucks, I hope.
Don't come to the lecture if you've got flu, maybe
NOTE CONF
there.
Maybe they're doing this online.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, um, I am going to hand over to
Chris just to do a quick shout out.
NOTE CONF
Hi everyone.
I'm Chris, hope you're looking forward to the week ahead.
NOTE CONF
I'm here to talk about Informatics Sport, which is a
new organisation.
NOTE CONF
This year we have a bunch of teams like men's
football elevens and fives, women's fives, men's rugby and then
NOTE CONF
mixed hockey, mixed squash.
Mixed tennis.
NOTE CONF
Mixed basketball.
Mixed volleyball.
NOTE CONF
Mixed netball.
Um, these are a great way to meet people, get
NOTE CONF
some exercise, pull out your CV with more things you
did at uni.
NOTE CONF
Um, especially because your first years.
It's a great way to ask older people about courses
NOTE CONF
and get a slightly more honest perspective than you might
otherwise.
NOTE CONF
Um, Neil's going to send around an email either later
or now with a link to the WhatsApp where you
NOTE CONF
can join.
Um, once again, my name is Chris, so feel free
NOTE CONF
to either find me outside working with love for the
distraction or to send me a message over the WhatsApp.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Great, thanks.
NOTE CONF
And there's a good mix right between teams that take
that are quite serious and quite competitive.
NOTE CONF
And then lots of just teams for fun and stuff.
There's a there's a recreational option for pretty much all
NOTE CONF
of the sports.
Um, they enter into the intramural leagues in most cases
NOTE CONF
where you can be competitive, but most options you can
just do a casual weekend kickabout or something like that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And didn't you guys win the November competition across the
NOTE CONF
whole University of Sports was like the.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um, different teams in the university and the, the Movember
NOTE CONF
competition to try and raise money by growing hideous moustaches.
We ended up winning, which was great.
NOTE CONF
If you'd like to get involved next year or also
there are roles opening for running things next year as
NOTE CONF
well.
So if that sounds interesting, please do let us know.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's really it's a lot of fun.
I definitely recommend getting, getting or looking that into that
NOTE CONF
more if you're at all interested in doing anything athletic.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thanks a lot, Chris.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So I don't have any questions to answer from last,
NOTE CONF
uh, from last time because I didn't move on to
the asking anything until right at the end of the
NOTE CONF
lecture.
So nobody had an opportunity to put any questions.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
Um, I'll make sure I do that properly this time.
NOTE CONF
Also, sorry about the quiz.
You might have seen the email that went out today.
NOTE CONF
Um.
The quiz.
NOTE CONF
The quiz was from last year.
It was.
NOTE CONF
It was today's.
It covered Thursday's lecture and today's lecture because of the
NOTE CONF
Monday, um, being out of being not in for B,
it pushed it all out of schedule, I knew this.
NOTE CONF
I knew that I had to change it.
I looked at it.
NOTE CONF
Somebody even came up to me after elected to remind
me, and I knew and I just forgot to tell
NOTE CONF
the to.
I forgot to ask him if he would make those
NOTE CONF
changes.
So sorry about that, but I'm leaving it open for
NOTE CONF
a week, so you should have plenty of time after
this lecture to go and do those questions right?
NOTE CONF
What do I want to do today are part of
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So this is Yaba and Zanzibar from Spirited Away who
here has seen Spirited Away quite a few people.
NOTE CONF
It's Spirited away.
It's such a great film.
NOTE CONF
It's Studio Ghibli, it's really it's my favourite of all
the Studio Ghibli.
NOTE CONF
It's absolutely beautiful.
And, uh, you, Barbara and Zanzibar are witches.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so these cats have been named after them,
and they love to fight and lick denim.
NOTE CONF
Seems like a weird thing.
But anyway, that's what the email said.
NOTE CONF
So they look very cute.
And then we have another cat.
NOTE CONF
This is Ginger.
And Ginger can sit and give you his paw on
NOTE CONF
demand, which is quite impressive for a cat because normally
cats don't care about that sort of stuff, but you
NOTE CONF
have to have a treat to get them to do
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
teaching awards.
NOTE CONF
Let me just put this up for a moment, please.
If you think anybody's been good, though, people really, really
NOTE CONF
appreciate being nominated.
It only takes a moment, you know, if you if
NOTE CONF
you think Julian did a good job or Don or
you know, or anybody you've been working with, there's lots
NOTE CONF
of different categories and it really, really is very meaningful
to people who are nominated.
NOTE CONF
And also it's very nice for the school to get
nominations.
NOTE CONF
So if you can think of anyone, just do that.
That will teach you to take you to the link.
NOTE CONF
But also you can just Google it.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So now we're already on ask me anything.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to leave it up so you can
put questions at any point.
NOTE CONF
And I will come back to them later on.
Oh okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to go quickly back over your
feedback from last week.
NOTE CONF
So um, so this first question about your marketing from
B, I mean, obviously, you know what I was wanting
NOTE CONF
you to answer here.
I'm trying to and I've said this before, but I
NOTE CONF
just want to keep emphasising that how well you do
in this course is a real combination between how much
NOTE CONF
experience you're coming in with.
Which is very much correlated to how, you know, whether
NOTE CONF
you've been studying in school.
But it's not necessarily the same because you might have
NOTE CONF
been studying a bit of a different way.
You know how much effort you put into the course,
NOTE CONF
how much support you're getting.
So most of you pick this up.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just trying to hammer away on that.
It's not reflection, a reflection of how much potential you
NOTE CONF
have as a programmer, not exclusively.
I mean, if you're, you know, if you really love
NOTE CONF
it and you spend a lot of time practising, you
will do better.
NOTE CONF
But, um, anyway, uh, okay.
How difficult is it?
NOTE CONF
So manageable is nearly 50%, which is great.
That's what we're aiming for and challenging.
NOTE CONF
But I'm coping okay is also okay.
And about 25% think easy.
NOTE CONF
That's probably because you've covered very similar material.
Enjoyment of the course was really good.
NOTE CONF
I'm really happy about that.
Only 1.9%.
NOTE CONF
So they weren't really enjoying it.
So I'm really pleased about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and a lot of you haven't started for assignment
one yet.
NOTE CONF
That's okay, because It's not due for a while, but
don't leave it all to last minute.
NOTE CONF
Do start doing it, I would recommend.
You know, you're just making life harder for yourself later
NOTE CONF
on.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And most of you are quite happy.
Either way, more than 50% of you actually like me
NOTE CONF
doing this, and the rest mostly don't really care.
Very small numbers of you think that this is annoying,
NOTE CONF
so I'm going to keep on doing it because it's
really useful for me and for the school.
NOTE CONF
For example, this feedback we've got.
So there is definitely a preference for Central Campus, slightly
NOTE CONF
less than I expected there to be.
Um, and inflections that are kind of annoying, creating complications
NOTE CONF
for quite a lot of you.
So thanks very much.
NOTE CONF
We we will that will feed into how we're thinking
about how we might be teaching in the future.
NOTE CONF
It's not completely up to us.
Um, but it's definitely really useful to get the views
NOTE CONF
from the students and to factored in as much as
we can.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's do some Java.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what we're talking about today are collections.
How you have groups of things that you're working through.
NOTE CONF
So we've already looked at one kind of collection, which
is an array, but now we're going to look a
NOTE CONF
little beyond that.
So arrays are pretty useful.
NOTE CONF
You've been doing quite a lot of things with arrays,
but as you already know, as we've talked about before,
NOTE CONF
arrays are limited.
Arrays are quite rigid structures.
NOTE CONF
So you fix the length.
When you create an array, you fix the length.
NOTE CONF
That is how it's stored in memory.
That is how much space you can store information about
NOTE CONF
the array in.
That's you forever.
NOTE CONF
That array is never going to change size.
So that's which is often kind of annoying.
NOTE CONF
Um, we know that arrays are part of Java language,
and there's lots of special syntax and things built in
NOTE CONF
to help us work with arrays, but they're not always
optimal for handling data.
NOTE CONF
So another thing you can use and you will use
quite a lot probably are array lists.
NOTE CONF
So array list essentially this is a sort of a
wrapper that the Java language puts around an array.
NOTE CONF
So under the hood you're still using arrays.
But if you if you create them as array list
NOTE CONF
it gives you lots of options to do things that
might be useful, which are not things you can do
NOTE CONF
directly with arrays.
So one of the most important things is that they
NOTE CONF
can grow and shrink as needed.
You don't have to decide at creation time how big
NOTE CONF
you want that to be in.
That sticks forever.
NOTE CONF
Um, and also there are different methods for inserting and
removing elements.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is how you declare an array.
It's very similar to how we always declare things.
NOTE CONF
But you have these, um, angular brackets with the with
in here.
NOTE CONF
This is the type of thing that's going to go
into an array list.
NOTE CONF
So like an array, everything in an array list has
to be the same type of thing.
NOTE CONF
And you have to declare it when you create it.
Um, you create a bit of memory as before, but
NOTE CONF
as you see, you're not telling it how big this
is.
NOTE CONF
You're just saying this is a new ArrayList.
Um, so here the first example is with string.
NOTE CONF
And you might do this with with built in types
or standard types like strings.
NOTE CONF
But very often you're going to be doing this with
objects you've created from classes that you've written.
NOTE CONF
So an example I think we're going to go on
to this example.
NOTE CONF
Not today, but later on.
Um, there's hotel room.
NOTE CONF
There's a big coding example where we're creating hotel rooms
and figuring stuff out.
NOTE CONF
So you might want to do that.
And then you have a array of different hotel rooms.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can do whatever you like.
The only limitation is that it cannot be a primitive
NOTE CONF
type.
You can't put integers or booleans in or whatever.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so this this is just the way that you
NOTE CONF
call it.
You have to have the empty bracket.
NOTE CONF
So this is essentially, um, showing what you're passing into
that, but you don't need to pass anything.
NOTE CONF
So we looked at calling methods.
There's a brackets afterwards which sometimes will have arguments in.
NOTE CONF
But even if you don't have arguments you have those
empty brackets in.
NOTE CONF
That's the way you call it.
Um, however, one useful thing in ArrayList, I don't know
NOTE CONF
why this happens for this, but not for anything else.
You know, normally we have this stupid thing Well, when
NOTE CONF
you create something new, you have to say what type
it is, and then you have to say, oh, the
NOTE CONF
thing I'm creating that is that thing is also the
same type as the thing that it is.
NOTE CONF
Um, but in ArrayList, you don't have to do this.
You do have to say it's a list, but you
NOTE CONF
don't have to duplicate what you're saying here because it
knows it's got to be strings.
NOTE CONF
So you don't have to say that again.
This is just something Java's been doing since for quite
NOTE CONF
a long time, since Java eight.
You can do it with ArrayList and in a way
NOTE CONF
that you can't do with other things for some reasons.
Okay, so we're not passing it aside right?
NOTE CONF
When we create it, it doesn't have a size.
Therefore when we when we first construct it, it has
NOTE CONF
size zero.
There's nothing in it.
NOTE CONF
And then we add methods to it and we can
remove if we want to.
NOTE CONF
And then the size is changing.
So let's have a look at that in IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to create an array list.
NOTE CONF
And here you can see this is a built in
stuff ArrayList e where E is going to be the
NOTE CONF
the type.
And here you can see it already knows that I
NOTE CONF
need I'm going to want to access the built in
methods in ArrayList.
NOTE CONF
So if we just go back to the um so
this is a Java API.
NOTE CONF
You can see there's all kinds of things that I
might want to do in ArrayList.
NOTE CONF
So I want to import all that all that functionality
when I'm doing the coding.
NOTE CONF
But I don't really need to bother with that because
IntelliJ already knows that I want to do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to create an array list.
NOTE CONF
And this is going to contain strings I'm going to
call it cheers.
NOTE CONF
And this is a new array list.
And here so you see it automatically puts those brackets
NOTE CONF
in because it knows that they're needed.
Um but I can leave that empty if I want
NOTE CONF
to.
Or I could put string in as the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So now I've got a new ArrayList.
Um, let's have a look at what that looks like.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is what it's going to print out right?
NOTE CONF
It is printing something.
It's saying there is definitely something here.
NOTE CONF
And the square brackets indicate this is an ArrayList, but
there's nothing in it.
NOTE CONF
It's empty.
So let's start adding things.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to do that using the add functionality.
So I'm adding something to my array list.
NOTE CONF
Cheers.
And I'm going to add a string.
NOTE CONF
It's got to be a string obviously because cheers is
an array of strings an array list of string strings
NOTE CONF
I should say.
So I'm going to add hip twice.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
What.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to do that.
And then I'm going to say hooray okay.
NOTE CONF
Um and then I'm going to run that.
What's that going to do.
NOTE CONF
Oh it's not going to do anything because I'm printing
it before I actually add anything to it.
NOTE CONF
So let's move that down here.
By the way, cutting and pasting.
NOTE CONF
When you're coding, uh, you probably will do it quite
a lot, but do be really careful.
NOTE CONF
It's really easy when you cut and paste to just
screw things up.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so now I print it out and this is
what it looks like.
NOTE CONF
It looks like an array.
Basically it's in square brackets and it's listing everything in
NOTE CONF
there with commas between it.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So there's various things I can do.
So let's maybe find the index of a particular thing.
NOTE CONF
So if I do it I'm going to get index.
And this is going to be I want the index
NOTE CONF
of the string hip.
And I'm looking at that within.
NOTE CONF
Cheers okay.
And then I'm going to print out index.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is telling me that um hip is at
NOTE CONF
index zero right.
So you see there's actually two hips in there.
NOTE CONF
I print out the original thing as well.
Um, so why is it only telling me one of
NOTE CONF
them.
So if we go back and have a look at
NOTE CONF
the, um, Javadoc, what we're looking for.
Index of.
NOTE CONF
I don't want the index of down here.
I'm.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I should have got this line up.
NOTE CONF
Here we go.
Index of.
NOTE CONF
So that's telling me it returns the first occurrence of
the specified element in the list.
NOTE CONF
So that is just how it's not inevitable that it
is that way.
NOTE CONF
But that is how it's been written.
So if you want to know how to do this,
NOTE CONF
you look at the API and you see what it's
giving you and what it's giving you is the first
NOTE CONF
occurrence of whatever it is that you're looking for.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's add another thing.
So.
NOTE CONF
Let's add here another thing saying hop.
So if I actually let's bring this down here which
NOTE CONF
is ad hoc.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's see what that looks like.
okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can see actually we've already seen this as
we're building up hip hip hooray.
NOTE CONF
But if you do add what is it?
Where does it put it.
NOTE CONF
It's going to put it at the end of the
array list.
NOTE CONF
So you're adding always adding to the back of the
array list if you just simply use add.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But we can do this differently.
So we can say actually um, so Add is going
NOTE CONF
to have more than one way.
This is an overloaded term.
NOTE CONF
It's got more ways of doing it.
Whereas add so here add with no um added just
NOTE CONF
with the element will amend it to the end of
the list.
NOTE CONF
But also we can give it an index.
And if we give it an index, that's not going
NOTE CONF
to put it at the end of the list.
It's going to put it at the index that we
NOTE CONF
specify.
So let's say here we're going to add uh it
NOTE CONF
index one.
And then we have a look at that.
NOTE CONF
So then it goes in at index one.
And it pushes everything else further down the array list.
NOTE CONF
And the array list is getting bigger as we do
this.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we can also do things like check whether
things are there, which is quite useful.
NOTE CONF
So there is a uh, a function called contains, um,
let's call it is in, uh, cheers.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Cheers.
NOTE CONF
Dot contains hip.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then let's print out is in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is saying true.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So hip is contained in this.
But if we say hap uh oops I don't want
NOTE CONF
to debug it.
It's going to say false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that contains is just looking for not how many
NOTE CONF
times it occurs but just whether it occurs at all.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
What else did I want to do?
I don't know what point I was making with that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's go through this a bit.
NOTE CONF
So we've seen a lot of this ad.
Um, I won't go through these in detail because this
NOTE CONF
is exactly what we've just been doing.
You can add the first occurrence or as an index
NOTE CONF
remove.
Let me just show you remove.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's then, um.
Cheers.
NOTE CONF
Remove hip.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what's going to happen here?
So I'm saying remove hip.
NOTE CONF
What's it going to print out?
Hop hip.
NOTE CONF
Hooray!
Okay, so hip is still there, but there is only
NOTE CONF
one occurrence now.
So what remove does is it finds the first time
NOTE CONF
something appears in an ArrayList and it removes that instance,
then it stops, it terminates, it's not going through.
NOTE CONF
And uh removing everything.
Uh get index will return the first uh the first
NOTE CONF
time an element occurs.
So let's just get rid of that and have to
NOTE CONF
get index.
No that's not What's it called?
NOTE CONF
I'll just get.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Get a hip.
Um.
NOTE CONF
String cannot be.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
This is supposed to be.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is a this is an index.
It's brackets.
NOTE CONF
Anyway.
You get the idea.
NOTE CONF
It's going to return the, um.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yes.
Well, okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm not printing it out, but what it's doing is
it's figuring out what's at that index.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's lots of, um, there's lots of useful things
NOTE CONF
you can do with this.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And to.
NOTE CONF
Oh, and the other thing is.
Sorry, I should have mentioned this.
NOTE CONF
You've obviously seen this.
This is another really nice thing.
NOTE CONF
Beyond that, you can't do with arrays.
You can see here I'm just saying print this array
NOTE CONF
list and it just prints it in a sensible, manageable
way.
NOTE CONF
As we know with arrays, you can't do that or
raise.
NOTE CONF
You either have to go through the for loop and
print everything separately, or you have to do the two
NOTE CONF
string methods.
But here you can just print it in a sensible
NOTE CONF
way.
So there's lots of things in here that you really
NOTE CONF
want arrays to do.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So I can do let's do um, okay.
So we can, we can do for loops, we can
NOTE CONF
loop through ArrayList.
So let's say for now we're going to do an
NOTE CONF
enhanced for loop because we don't need the index in
here.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say for um s in cheers.
So for everything that's inches every item and s we
NOTE CONF
need to say is a string.
Also S is a terrible name.
NOTE CONF
Let's say for word in cheers.
What we want to do is we're going to just
NOTE CONF
print out the index.
I don't want to print out the index.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's been so difficult.
Um, word plus has index.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to.
Oh why is it keep doing that.
NOTE CONF
Um now I'm going to get the index of.
Um word and I'm going to print that out.
NOTE CONF
That should work.
Let's just get rid of these.
NOTE CONF
And if I haven't accidentally got rid of too many
brackets, I should work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And also, let's just print out the line here.
NOTE CONF
We don't want a blank line there okay.
So just a little reminder of enhanced for loops.
NOTE CONF
We are going through something.
This isn't the case as an ArrayList, but we've done
NOTE CONF
this with arrays.
And for everything that's in that container we're doing this
NOTE CONF
particular thing which is printing out that that item and
its index.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So here you can see um hyp has index zero,
NOTE CONF
hoppers index one, Hyp has index zero.
So in the second place, we're now on to the
NOTE CONF
second tip.
But it's still telling us that it's at index zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That is because this is kind of.
NOTE CONF
So it's just this is just looking for a string.
It's not looking for this particular.
NOTE CONF
Well it is looking for a string that exactly matches
it.
NOTE CONF
But it's not looking for the string particularly in that
index.
NOTE CONF
So it's going to go to the whole array and
it's going to find the first instance of it.
NOTE CONF
Even though you're in a loop that's going through the
array one by one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is just something you need to be a
NOTE CONF
little bit careful of.
Make sure you understand that these things are happening when
NOTE CONF
you're doing these these manipulations, these methods within for loops.
Just be really conscious of how it's working and think
NOTE CONF
about whether it's actually working on the particular item you're
looking at or whether it's looking at the whole collection.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Great.
NOTE CONF
So we could have done that with a standard for
loop, but easier because we're not using.
NOTE CONF
We're only using the iterator to, to to do each
individual thing.
NOTE CONF
We're not using it as a counter or anything.
Then we can just do the enhanced for loop, which
NOTE CONF
is easier.
Um, and we've looked at that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now remember I said that ArrayList.
NOTE CONF
You can't use primitive types.
You can't have an array list of ints.
NOTE CONF
Um, but maybe sometimes you want to have an array
list of int.
NOTE CONF
So what do you do.
Well we've looked at this before.
NOTE CONF
We have these wrapper classes, which is essentially just a
way of turning, uh, primitive types into objects.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to worry about this too much.
You just need to know that this is this is
NOTE CONF
the thing.
If you want to put primitive types in places where
NOTE CONF
primitive types don't go, you just use this conversion and
it's super easy.
NOTE CONF
And usually it just means you turn the first letter
to A from lowercase to uppercase, sometimes it's into integer,
NOTE CONF
etc..
Um, and you don't you don't need to do anything
NOTE CONF
about this.
So here I'm saying this is 2.75.
NOTE CONF
That is a double.
That is a primitive type with a lowercase d.
NOTE CONF
That is what its type is.
As I'm defining it here.
NOTE CONF
But I'm saying, actually, I want you to consider this
to be an object double, not a primitive type.
NOTE CONF
I'm indicating that to Java with the capital letter.
I can just do that.
NOTE CONF
And likewise the other way around, I've said that battery
charge is a is an object because it's got a
NOTE CONF
capital D, but now I'm saying, right, I want you
to treat this thing X which I'm making.
NOTE CONF
Equivalent battery charges battery charge.
Treat that as a as a as a primitive type.
NOTE CONF
You can just switch between these as you like.
And you do this so that it's just a little
NOTE CONF
hack so that you can use things where primitive types
are not allowed.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So uh, most of the time, or maybe not most
NOTE CONF
of the time, a lot of the time, you're going
to be putting your own data types into an array
NOTE CONF
list.
Um, sorry, I've just realised I have no idea what
NOTE CONF
the time is.
I ought to keep an eye on the time anyway.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so here what I'm doing is I'm creating
a new thing I'm constructing.
NOTE CONF
I'm making something that I'm calling circle here.
I'm constructing that, and I'm going to put my thing,
NOTE CONF
my circles into an array list.
So an array list contain anything you like.
NOTE CONF
Very often this will be your own objects.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Some functionality will not work properly unless you implement the
necessary interfaces.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I actually maybe should have removed that because I don't
NOTE CONF
want you to think about that later.
Until later, we'll go through this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but just be aware that it does get a
little bit more complicated, and we'll look at that in
NOTE CONF
more detail.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look at nested array lists.
And so you can um, this can get arbitrarily complicated
NOTE CONF
which is always fun.
Obviously good principle of coding, which I talk about all
NOTE CONF
the time.
Don't make it too complex.
NOTE CONF
So you can have an array list like 1020 deep.
Don't do that because it'll be impossible to understand and
NOTE CONF
really difficult to work with.
But sometimes, um, uh, sometimes, um, having a list of
NOTE CONF
array list can be quite useful.
So let's have a look here.
NOTE CONF
We're going to do something about the weather.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to make an array list.
And this is what's going to be in my array
NOTE CONF
list.
It's going to be array list.
NOTE CONF
This is an array list of array lists.
And these array lists are going to be a type
NOTE CONF
double okay.
And this is going to be a new array list.
NOTE CONF
Array list.
Is that right.
NOTE CONF
Or am I.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Come on that.
I think all my brackets are working.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now I'm going to see what does this actually
NOTE CONF
look like.
Now because I'm doing things with arrays.
NOTE CONF
When I'm when I'm auto completing from system, it's thinking.
That's why it keeps filling it with things from arrays
NOTE CONF
when actually I'm trying to get it to print.
So that's why that happens.
NOTE CONF
And this is oh wait, this doesn't have a name.
Let's give it a name.
NOTE CONF
We're going to call it Daley.
Daley temp okay.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to print Daley temp.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't like this.
Why does it not like this?
NOTE CONF
It doesn't like this.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Because probably.
I think it's.
NOTE CONF
Oh, it's because of this.
Over here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let's run this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is what it looks like.
It's created this for me, and but it's empty, so
NOTE CONF
there's nothing in it so far.
Um.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
Now I want to add something to it.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to add the first thing I'm going
to add is a new.
NOTE CONF
There's no I've told it this is a ArrayList of
ArrayList.
NOTE CONF
But there are no ArrayList in there because I haven't
added any.
NOTE CONF
So now I can add an ArrayList.
So daily tempered and uh it's going to be a
NOTE CONF
new ArrayList of type double.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what is this going to look like okay.
So now you see there is an ArrayList in there.
NOTE CONF
So now I have an ArrayList containing one ArrayList and
that internal ArrayList has nothing in it, but it exists.
NOTE CONF
And obviously if I.
Then.
NOTE CONF
If I tried to add something that wasn't an ArrayList,
um, it's not going to like it.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
So incompatible types obviously, because I've said although there's nothing
NOTE CONF
in it, I've said it's going to be an ArrayList.
So that's what it's expecting.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now I can start adding things to my ArrayList.
NOTE CONF
Uh but how do I do that.
So if I just do if I just say right
NOTE CONF
I'm going to add some temperatures, I'm going to add
temperature.
NOTE CONF
What's the temperature today.
About four degrees.
NOTE CONF
Um, but obviously I can't just do add 4.0 okay.
Because it's not expecting doubles.
NOTE CONF
It's expecting an array list.
So I'm not putting this straight into daily temp.
NOTE CONF
I'm putting it into one of the array lists that
exists in there.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to put it well there only is
one that exists at the moment.
NOTE CONF
So I have to put, um.
So I have to use the get command.
NOTE CONF
So if we, if we look back at what get
was actually doing, okay.
NOTE CONF
So get returns the element at the specific position in
the list.
NOTE CONF
So I need to think where do I want this
to go.
NOTE CONF
I need to get that element and I need to
change that element.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to get zero the first the the
first thing in there I want you to get it.
NOTE CONF
And then I want to add 4.02 whatever comes back
from get zero, which will be, um, which will be
NOTE CONF
the empty array list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I print that I have to put the
print command in the right place.
NOTE CONF
So it's printing it after it's done this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now we can see 4.0 is in the first
array.
NOTE CONF
So I can add another array list to it.
If I want to I can add as many as
NOTE CONF
I like.
Let's add three.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so now I've added three array lists.
If I run that, you can see there's now three
NOTE CONF
elements of the top level array list.
And one of them has got something in it and
NOTE CONF
the others don't.
And I can do this exactly as I like for
NOTE CONF
any of them.
I can say, all right, let's get let's add something
NOTE CONF
to the whatever's in second position.
This is going to be 10.0.
NOTE CONF
Um, and to the first one I want to add
another element.
NOTE CONF
Let's say 3.7.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now it's got three array lists and one the
first has got two elements, the second has got zero
NOTE CONF
still and the third has got one.
So we build it up in that way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is just a reminder.
NOTE CONF
We already looked at this.
You need to import the right the right information.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's get rid of these.
We don't need these.
NOTE CONF
So, so these are these are actually things when I
was playing around with it before, I was using things
NOTE CONF
that needed arrays and hash maps, which are going to
get onto in a minute.
NOTE CONF
It's not using these anymore.
So the import statements are still there, but they're not
NOTE CONF
doing anything.
But IntelliJ has put in this import array list for
NOTE CONF
me.
Otherwise it wouldn't work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's have a look at a different kind of
NOTE CONF
array list.
This is going to be strings.
NOTE CONF
So hang on I think I've got a different example
for that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now we've got an array list of strings.
NOTE CONF
Here's one I made earlier.
And this has got three three names in it Charles,
NOTE CONF
Mary and Peter.
So what we've looked at so far is adding and
NOTE CONF
removing stuff.
But sometimes what you want to do is manipulate any
NOTE CONF
number of things in an array list.
So what I want to do at the moment is
NOTE CONF
I want to find any element in my array list
that has the, uh, this string are within it, Right.
NOTE CONF
So I've got this is a string called indicator.
And I've marked it final because I don't want people
NOTE CONF
changing it.
Um, and what I want to do is to go
NOTE CONF
through and, um, to go through and what this is
doing.
NOTE CONF
What this is trying to say is that if, uh,
for every name in this array, if that name contains
NOTE CONF
this indicator, then remove it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look at what's going to happen.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Don't want to debug.
I want to okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is printing out this array list as we
looked at before.
NOTE CONF
But then it's getting really upset with this concurrent modification
exception.
NOTE CONF
I don't actually even really know what that means.
But what it means is you can't do that this
NOTE CONF
way with array lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this.
Oh, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So to do this you need iterators.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And iterators are objects.
NOTE CONF
And they allow you to iterate through each element of
a collection.
NOTE CONF
So this is something you'll need to do quite a
lot to.
NOTE CONF
You have to have an object that is going through.
So let's show how we would actually do this.
NOTE CONF
Let's get rid of this.
So comment that out.
NOTE CONF
And this which opened earlier is already commented.
So let's uncomment this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what I'm saying here is.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm creating something that is an iterator.
And this iterator is going to be a string.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be a string.
Because what I'm trying to do here is find things
NOTE CONF
that have a particular string.
Uh, no, sorry.
NOTE CONF
That's completely not true.
Forget I just said that it's of type string because
NOTE CONF
this is an array list of strings.
Okay, so I'm using this iterator command.
NOTE CONF
We can again look at iterator in the API.
Uh I don't know why is this not enough particular
NOTE CONF
order anyway I don't know where it is, but you
can have a look and see exactly what that's doing.
NOTE CONF
And I'm doing it on this array.
Names is an array list.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So while there is another element I'm going through until
NOTE CONF
it's empty and I'm and I'm finding what is the
next one, as long as there is a next one,
NOTE CONF
I want to look at what that next one is.
I'm going to make that temporarily name.
NOTE CONF
And then if it contains the indicator you remove that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I just show you how that works if
I just run that.
NOTE CONF
So this this is, this is originally printing it out
and this is what it's printing out now.
NOTE CONF
It's just printing out Peter because Charles and Mary both
have the substring.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
So they're being removed by that process.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the the kind of actual thing that does the
NOTE CONF
work is very similar to what we have in this
for loop, but we don't do it with a for
NOTE CONF
loop.
We have to do it with an iterator.
NOTE CONF
For various reasons that are more complex than I want
to get into at the moment.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, I don't know if I actually really
know myself either.
NOTE CONF
That's how it works in Java.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Associative arrays.
NOTE CONF
Uh so one thing.
So we know in array we have this index right.
NOTE CONF
We have a unique index.
Everything has a key.
NOTE CONF
And that is a that's its index.
Um but with regular arrays this is fixed.
NOTE CONF
You start at zero and they're integers.
And that is how you associate things to their positions.
NOTE CONF
Um, however, if you want you don't always want to
do that.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Sometimes you want to have keys that are not just
NOTE CONF
integers.
And you can do this with associative arrays.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if you have a person's phone number,
you if you have a person's name, you want to
NOTE CONF
be able to look up their phone number.
So then you want the key to be the person's
NOTE CONF
name.
It's not very helpful just to have an integer index
NOTE CONF
for that.
And there's various different, um, things you might want to
NOTE CONF
do with that.
Um, and then you have this relationship between the key
NOTE CONF
and the value.
You're mapping.
NOTE CONF
You're using mapping.
And um, in general these are called associative arrays.
NOTE CONF
But the way they're implemented in Java are hash maps
okay.
NOTE CONF
So associative arrays in Java are hash maps type HashMap
okay.
NOTE CONF
So for example you might want to map students to
their matric numbers.
NOTE CONF
So the keys here are strings and the values are
also strings actually.
NOTE CONF
Um so you can do this if you want to.
Um here we're mapping words to their lengths.
NOTE CONF
And you can see we've got more than one mapping
to the same values.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
So keys can map to more than one value okay.
NOTE CONF
But keys themselves must be unique.
We can't have key with the same name.
NOTE CONF
That makes sense, right?
Because we use the keys to look things up.
NOTE CONF
And if there's more than one, that's the same.
But that's not really a key.
NOTE CONF
You don't know which one you're looking for.
Um, also.
NOTE CONF
The key can only be mapped to one value.
Is that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the key.
NOTE CONF
So the keys themselves have to map to one value.
Keys cannot map to more than one thing.
NOTE CONF
right?
Because the key is what you're using to look it
NOTE CONF
up.
It's got to be unique and it's got to map
NOTE CONF
to something specific.
Now that's fine if you want it.
NOTE CONF
If we want to know loads of information about pizza,
and we want this to point to lots of stuff,
NOTE CONF
we can do that, but only by putting them in
a collection.
NOTE CONF
We can put it in array for example.
So Peter would just be pointing to one thing that
NOTE CONF
would be an array.
And then within the array we might have lots of
NOTE CONF
different things.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to do this with hash maps.
Right.
NOTE CONF
What am I doing with the hash map.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we need to import Java util HashMap.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to make um let's go back to
the other one.
NOTE CONF
Let's get rid of all of this.
I'm going to make a hash map.
NOTE CONF
So Mm mm.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So HashMap.
And you can see there's capital the capital M.
NOTE CONF
It's helping me do that.
Uh string and int.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
As I've just been saying uh in in these collections
NOTE CONF
you can't use primitive types that I was just typing
in int didn't like it because this is not valid.
NOTE CONF
I need to put integer instead.
So what am I doing here?
NOTE CONF
I'm saying in my HashMap the the keys are going
to be strings and the values are going to be
NOTE CONF
integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is going to be I'm going oh it
needs a name.
NOTE CONF
This is going to be word length.
And this is going to be a new HashMap.
NOTE CONF
Uh of yeah that's fine.
So let's then have a look at what that looks
NOTE CONF
like.
Okay, this is what a HashMap looks like that's got
NOTE CONF
curly braces instead of the square brackets that you have
for arrays and res lists.
NOTE CONF
Obviously there's nothing in that at the moment because I
haven't done anything with that.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
But let's, uh, let's, let's have something that we want
NOTE CONF
to put in it.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to have a sentence.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Somebody give me a sentence.
And you think of a sentence or phrase, a few
NOTE CONF
words, random words, anything.
Nobody's going to tell me.
NOTE CONF
Come on.
I'm going to wait until somebody says something.
NOTE CONF
Brilliant.
Live.
NOTE CONF
Laugh.
Love.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to just put this in just
because then we've got a little bit of repetition.
NOTE CONF
Um, Okay, so this is my string, and I'm going
to use some built in a built in method called
NOTE CONF
split.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to create words string.
This is an array.
NOTE CONF
So words is an array of strings.
And I'm going to split the sentence by spaces.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um actually yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to use a sentence dot split.
And then in here I'm going to put just a
NOTE CONF
space.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this means split this up.
Every time you see a space.
NOTE CONF
You're moving on to something new.
And then let's have a look at what that's going
NOTE CONF
to look like.
Uh, words.
NOTE CONF
Oh, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what's gone wrong here?
Because I've forgotten.
NOTE CONF
Because I was doing ArrayList and HashMap.
So you can just print out easily.
NOTE CONF
But actually I've told it that words is an actual
array.
NOTE CONF
It's not an ArrayList.
So I can't do simple printing.
NOTE CONF
I've got to do the array of two string methods.
And look, did you see how when I did that,
NOTE CONF
let me just show you this again.
Um, this is this is commented out.
NOTE CONF
We don't need util arrays, but once I do this,
uh, to string, I'm using a two string method from
NOTE CONF
array, so it automatically knows.
Actually now we do use it.
NOTE CONF
And that's why that's now upgrade to show that this
is actually being used.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and we're sending words to them okay.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to get rid of these commas because
that's just making it harder to see what's going on.
NOTE CONF
So this is what split does.
It creates uh, it separates things.
NOTE CONF
Um, according to it creates an array.
It turns a string into an array with each of
NOTE CONF
different elements.
And here I'm saying, uh, when you have a space,
NOTE CONF
start with a new element I could put.
Let's see if I put like l, I want you
NOTE CONF
to split it on that instead.
This is what it would look like.
NOTE CONF
So it's splitting until when it comes to an L
it's removing that and it's creating a new thing.
NOTE CONF
But I'm going to do space.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So now I've got my.
Now I've got my words and I am making this
NOTE CONF
hash map okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to say for I'm going to do an
enhanced for loop for string.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Uh word in words okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going through my array.
And for every uh element of that I'm going to
NOTE CONF
put things into my HashMap.
So my hash map is called word length okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to do word length.
Dot put.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is how you add things to a to
NOTE CONF
a hash to a hash map.
And it's telling me here what needs to be in
NOTE CONF
here I need a key which has got to be
a string.
NOTE CONF
And I need a value which has got to be
an integer.
NOTE CONF
And it knows that because that's what I've told it,
that the HashMap word length is like.
NOTE CONF
so my key is going to be the word and
my integer value is going to be how long that
NOTE CONF
word is.
So that's going to be word dot length okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I run that that should now print out
my HashMap okay.
NOTE CONF
So you see before I did that the HashMap was
just empty.
NOTE CONF
But now I've been putting things into my HashMap.
I've been putting one thing in for every element of
NOTE CONF
this array.
And what it's doing here is telling me is telling
NOTE CONF
me what's in there and what its key is.
So the word love.
NOTE CONF
So the word love is the key.
Its value is four.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because love is four words, four letters long.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then you can, you can see each of
the values is how many how many letters are in
NOTE CONF
there that's been calculated on the length.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Was another point you can see.
So you can see there's a lot of repetition.
NOTE CONF
So again and laugh are both have values five.
That doesn't matter but.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there's actually no repetition because, um, this is uppercase
and that's lowercase.
NOTE CONF
So let's make it lowercase.
Now we can see Liv is coming in twice.
NOTE CONF
Right.
What's going to happen here?
NOTE CONF
Because I've told you that keys have to be unique.
So what's it going to do with this?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so live here.
There's only one instance of it, right?
NOTE CONF
So it's starting off.
When it's going through this it's going to find Liv
NOTE CONF
live.
Live has length four.
NOTE CONF
Um, but it's not coming up twice.
It's just removing the second instance of it because keys
NOTE CONF
have to be unique, right?
So it's not going to put the same key in,
NOTE CONF
um, when it already exists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what it does.
It'll just discount repetition if you're telling it.
NOTE CONF
Those are keys.
Okay okay.
NOTE CONF
There's also hash tables.
There's a sort of you can think of them as
NOTE CONF
the same as hash maps.
There are some subtle differences, but for now you can
NOTE CONF
think of hash tables as pretty much interchangeable.
Okay, so this is exactly what we've already done.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is our enhanced for loop.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
This is a different way of doing it.
No, not a different way of doing it.
NOTE CONF
A different thing that you might want to do.
So what's happening here?
NOTE CONF
Um, here, we're getting the key set, and this is
the set of, of keys in word length.
NOTE CONF
So this is printing out.
Uh oh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So key set is just going to print out all
the different keys.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is what we've seen, but you can
loop through.
NOTE CONF
So what this is doing here.
Um, so we were adding things to it.
NOTE CONF
So what you can do and there's lots of things
you could do, but you can, um, print out this
NOTE CONF
is, um, looping over all the keys to print out
what they are.
NOTE CONF
Um, and here we're using, remember the format, the print
f that we looked at last time?
NOTE CONF
We're formatting a string because we want to say this
is going to be the key.
NOTE CONF
And this is going to be the, uh, value.
This is what we want the string to look like.
NOTE CONF
And then we're filling in all these values for each
iteration.
NOTE CONF
So if that's not familiar, have a bit of a
play with that.
NOTE CONF
Looked back at the lecture, last lecture and printing.
This is what we've just done.
NOTE CONF
So you can print out hash maps very easily which
is nice.
NOTE CONF
Um, here you of course you can put your own
data types into hash maps.
NOTE CONF
So here what we're doing, we've created circles like we
saw with the array lists.
NOTE CONF
But we want to put it into a hash hashmap
because we want there to be um keys.
NOTE CONF
So what we're doing here is we're creating a small
the key the keys are the size basically.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the key type of the key is, is
string.
NOTE CONF
And the type of the of the value is circle.
So in small we're putting this new circle which is
NOTE CONF
of size two etc. etc..
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
We will touch a little bit later on that there
NOTE CONF
are certain restrictions about what you can use in keys.
Most importantly you have to have a equals method.
NOTE CONF
So generally when you're defining things you will have a
equals method anyway.
NOTE CONF
But with keys that's compulsory because you want to be
able to compare keys.
NOTE CONF
So there must be a way of knowing if keys
are equal or not.
NOTE CONF
So you can only do things for which a equals
method is defined.
NOTE CONF
Here again we can write nested HashMap.
So this is a HashMap where the the value is
NOTE CONF
an ArrayList.
And here so we're saying there's large circles and there's
NOTE CONF
small circles.
But we don't want that to be only one large
NOTE CONF
circle and only one small circle.
But keys as we know have to point to one
NOTE CONF
specific value.
So we can't have the keys small, pointing to lots
NOTE CONF
of different circles that can only point to one thing.
So we're going to get it to point not to
NOTE CONF
a circle, but to an array list of circles.
And in that array list, we can put all of
NOTE CONF
the circles that we want to say are small.
And here you can see what this does.
NOTE CONF
It circles are five and six.
They're small.
NOTE CONF
Large circles are 203 hundred.
And we can do that arbitrarily complex Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Summary.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
So you use an array list when you want arrays
NOTE CONF
to be able to grow, or you want to use
that nice built in functionality of easily adding and removing
NOTE CONF
and printing.
Um, and you can move things around and it's, and
NOTE CONF
it has a lot of advantages.
Um, HashMap when you want to have a key that
NOTE CONF
is not just integers that you get with arrays and
ArrayList, you can look at the Java API.
NOTE CONF
Um, but importantly you need to have this iterator object
if you want to iterate through collections and do something
NOTE CONF
to every, um, item in the collection.
Okay, so that's all for today.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I will look at what's coming in and
we'll clap.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Are there any questions.
NOTE CONF
Um to a solution to the tutorials should be oh
they should be on the um the solutions for tutorials
NOTE CONF
should come out after everyone's done the tutorials.
They should be on the course uh materials page.
NOTE CONF
I will have a look.
If they're not there, I apologise.
NOTE CONF
I'll get them put there.
Uh, officer, today I'm going to bring fruit.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to be here on Thursday.
So on Thursday you're going to get Colton's going to
NOTE CONF
come and do the lecture.
And I'm sure he's going to be really great.
NOTE CONF
So, um, that would be something to look forward to.
But I will be in my office this afternoon, uh,
NOTE CONF
next week is, is, uh, is, uh, whatever, whatever they
call it these days, there's no teaching.
NOTE CONF
Next week, you will not see me.
Don't come to your lectures next week.
NOTE CONF
There's nothing you have to do.
Chill out and have a nice time, and I will
NOTE CONF
see you in two weeks, I guess.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Uh, HashMap orders its elements.
NOTE CONF
You order the elements in a HashMap.
It depends how you put them in.
NOTE CONF
You tell it how, where you want it to go.
Um, there's a question about assignment.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you want, if you want the questions about
the if you have questions about something, put it on
NOTE CONF
Piazza.
It should be answered really quickly.
NOTE CONF
If it's somehow urgent and not getting a response and
just email me.
NOTE CONF